# Project 1

#### General Discussion
Across two experiments, we found evidence in support of the benefits of variability hypothesis in a simple, computerized projectile throwing task. Generalization was observed in both constant and varied participants, in that both groups tended to perform better at novel positions in the testing phase than did participants who started with those positions in the training phase. However, varied trained participants consistently performed better than constant trained participants, in terms of both the testing phase in general, and in a comparison that only included untrained positions. We also found some evidence for the less commonly observed pattern wherein varied-trained participants outperform constant-trained participants even from conditions identical to the constant group training (Goode et al., 2008; Green et al., 1995; Kerr & Booth, 1978). In experiment 1 varied participants performed significantly better on this identity comparison. In Experiment 2, the comparison was not significant initially, but became significant after controlling for the similarity measure that incorporates only a single value for the steepness of similarity-based generalization (c). Furthermore, we showed that the general pattern of results from Experiment 2 could be parsimoniously accommodated by an instance-based similarity model, but only with the assumption that constant and varied participants generalize their training experience to different degrees. Our results thus suggest that the benefits of variation cannot be explained by the varied-trained participants simply covering a broader range of the task space. Rather, the modeling suggests that varied participants also learn to adaptively tune their generalization function such that throwing locations generalize more broadly to one another than they do in the constant condition. A learning system could end up adopting a higher c value in the constant than variable training conditions by monitoring the trial-by-trial variability of the training items. The c parameter would be adapted downwards when adjacent training items are dissimilar to each other and adapted upwards when adjacent training items are the same. In this fashion, contextually appropriate c values could be empirically learned. This learning procedure would capture the insight that if a situation has a high amount variability, then the learner should be predisposed toward thinking that subsequent test items will also show considerable variability, in which case generalization gradients should be broad, as is achieved by low values for c.

Also of interest is whether the IGAS model can predict the pattern of results wherein the varied condition outperforms the constant condition even from the position on which the constant condition trained. Although our models were fit using all of the Experiment 2 training and testing data, not just that of the identity comparisons, in Figure 9 we demonstrate how a simplified version of the IGAS model could in principle produce such a pattern. In addition to the assumption of differential generalization between varied and constant conditions, our simplified model makes explicit an assumption that is incorporated into the full IGAS model – namely that even when being tested from a position identical to that which was trained, there are always some psychological contextual differences between training and testing throws, resulting in a non-zero dissimilarity.

As mentioned above, the idea that learners flexibly adjust their generalization gradient based on prior experience does have precedent in the domains of category learning (Aha & Goldstone, 1992; Briscoe & Feldman, 2011; Hahn et al., 2005; Lamberts, 1994; Op de Beeck et al., 2008), and sensorimotor adaptation (Marongelli & Thoroughman, 2013; Taylor & Ivry, 2013; Thoroughman & Taylor, 2005). Lamberts (1994) showed that a simple manipulation of background knowledge during a categorization test resulted in participants generalizing their training experience more or less broadly, and moreover that such a pattern could be captured by allowing the generalization parameter of an instance-based similarity model to be fit separately between conditions. The flexible generalization parameter has also successfully accounted for generalization behavior in cases where participants have been trained on categories that differ in their relative variability (Hahn et al., 2005; Sakamoto et al., 2006). However, to the best of our knowledge, IGAS is the first instance-based similarity model that has been put forward to account for the effect of varied training in a visuomotor skill task. Although IGAS was inspired by work in the domain of category learning, its success in a distinct domain may not be surprising in light of the numerous prior observations that at least certain aspects of learning and generalization may operate under common principles across different tasks and domains (Censor et al., 2012; Hills et al., 2010; Jamieson et al., 2022; Law & Gold, 2010; Roark et al., 2021; Rosenbaum et al., 2001; Vigo et al., 2018; Wall et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020).

Our modelling approach does differ from category learning implementations of instance-based models in several ways. One such difference is the nature of the training instances that are assumed to be stored. In category learning studies, instances are represented as points in a multidimensional space of all of the attributes that define a category item (e.g. size/color/shape). Rather than defining instances in terms of what stimuli learners experience, our approach assumes that stored, motor instances reflect how they act, in terms of the velocity applied to the ball on each throw. An advantage of many motor learning tasks is the relative ease with which task execution variables can be directly measured (e.g. movement force, velocity, angle, posture) in addition to the decision and response time measures that typically exhaust the data generated from more classical cognitive tasks. Of course, whether learners actually are storing each individual motor instance is a fundamental question beyond the scope of the current work – though as described in the introduction there is some evidence in support of this idea (Chamberlin & Magill, 1992a; Crump & Logan, 2010; Hommel, 1998; Meigh et al., 2018; Poldrack et al., 1999). A particularly noteworthy instance-based model of sensory-motor behavior is the Knowledge II model of Rosenbaum and colleagues (R. G. Cohen & Rosenbaum, 2004; Rosenbaum et al., 1995). Knowledge II explicitly defines instances as postures (joint combinations), and is thus far more detailed than IGAS in regards to the contents of stored instances. Knowledge II also differs from IGAS in that learning is accounted for by both the retrieval of stored postures, and the generation of novel postures via the modification of retrieved postures. A promising avenue for future research would be to combine the adaptive similarity mechanism of IGAS with the novel instance generation mechanisms of Knowledge II.

Our findings also have some conceptual overlap with an earlier study on the effects of varied training in a coincident timing task (Catalano & Kleiner, 1984). In this task, participants observe a series of lamps lighting up consecutively, and attempt to time a button press with the onset of the final lamp. The design consisted of four separate constant groups, each training from a single lighting velocity, and a single varied group training with all four of the lighting velocities used by the individual constant groups. Participants were then split into four separate testing conditions, each of which were tested from a single novel lighting velocity of varying distance from the training conditions. The result of primary interest was that all participants performed worse as the distance between training and testing velocity increased – a typical generalization decrement. However, varied participants showed less of a decrement than did constant participants. The authors take this result as evidence that varied training results in a less-steep generalization gradient than does constant training. Although the experimental conclusions of Catalano and Kleiner are similar to our own, our work is novel in that we account for our results with a cognitive model, and without assuming the formation of a schema. Additionally, the way in which Catalano and Kleiner collapse their separate constant groups together may result in similarity confounds between varied and constant conditions that leaves their study open to methodological criticisms, especially in light of related work which demonstrated that the extent to which varied training may be beneficial can depend on whether the constant group they are compared against trained from similar conditions to those later tested (Wrisberg et al., 1987). Our study alleviates such concerns by explicitly controlling for similarity.

### Limitations

A limitation of this study concerns the ordering of the testing/transfer trials at the conclusion of both experiments. Participants were tested from each separate position (4 in Experiment 1, 6 in Experiment 2) in a random, intermixed order. Because the varied group was trained from two positions that were also randomly ordered, they may have benefited from experience with this type of sequencing, whereas the constant groups had no experience with switching between positions trial to trial. This concern is somewhat ameliorated by the fact that the testing phase performance of the constant groups from their trained position was not significantly worse than their level of performance at the end of the training phase, suggesting that they were not harmed by random ordering of positions during testing. It should also be noted that the computerized task utilized in the present work is relatively simple compared to many of the real-world tasks utilized in prior research. It is thus conceivable that the effect of variability in more complex tasks is distinct from the process put forward in the present work. An important challenge for future work will be to assess the extent to which IGAS can account for generalization in relatively complex tasks with far more degrees of freedom.

It is common for psychological process models of categorization learning to use an approach such as multidimensional scaling so as to transform the stimuli from the physical dimensions used in the particular task into the psychological dimensions more reflective of the actual human representations (Nosofsky, 1992; Shepard, 1987). Such scaling typically entails having participants rate the similarity between individual items and using these similarity judgements to then compute the psychological distances between stimuli, which can then be fed into a subsequent model. In the present investigation, there was no such way to scale the x and y velocity components in terms of the psychological similarity, and thus our modelling does rely on the assumption that the psychological distances between the different throwing positions are proportional to absolute distances in the metric space of the task (e.g. the relative distance between positions 400 and 500 is equivalent to that between 800 and 900). However, an advantage of our approach is that we are measuring similarity in terms of how participants behave (applying a velocity to the ball), rather than the metric features of the task stimuli.

### Conclusion

Our experiments demonstrate a reliable benefit of varied training in a simple projectile launching task. Such results were accounted for by an instance-based model that assumes that varied training results in the computation of a broader similarity-based generalization gradient. Instance-based models augmented with this assumption may be a valuable approach towards better understanding skill generalization and transfer.

# Project 2


## Introduction

In project 1, I applied model-based techniques to quantify and control for the similarity between training and testing experience, which in turn enabled us to account for the difference between varied and constant training via an extended version of a similarity based generalization model. In project 2, we will go a step further, implementing a full process model capable of both 1) producing novel responses and 2) modeling behavior in both the learning and testing stages of the experiment. Project 2 also places a greater emphasis on extrapolation performance following training. Although varied training has often been purported to be particularly beneficial for generalization or transfer, few experiments have compared varied and constant training in contexts with unambiguous extrapolation testing.

### Function Learning and Extrapolation

The study of human function learning investigates how people learn relationships between continuous input and output values. Function learning is studied both in tasks where individuals are exposed to a sequence of input/output pairs (DeLosh et al., 1997; McDaniel et al., 2013), or situations where observers are presented with a an incomplete scatterplot or line graph and make predictions about regions of the plot that don’t contain data (Ciccione & Dehaene, 2021; Courrieu, 2012; Said & Fischer, 2021; Schulz et al., 2020).

Carroll (1963) conducted the earliest work on function learning. Input stimuli and output responses were both lines of varying length. The correct output response was related to the length of the input line by a linear, quadratic, or random function. Participants in the linear and quadratic performed above chance levels during extrapolation testing, with those in the linear condition performing the best overall. Carroll argued that these results were best explained by a ruled based model wherein learners form an abstract representation of the underlying function. Subsequent work by Brehmer (1974),testing a wider array of functional forms, provided further evidence for superior extrapolation in tasks with linear functions. Brehmer argued that individuals start out with an assumption of a linear function, but given sufficient error will progressively test alternative hypothesis with polynomials of greater degree. Koh & Meyer (1991) employed a visuomotor function learning task, wherein participants were trained on examples from an unknown function relating the length of an input line to the duration of a response (time between keystrokes). In this domain, participants performed best when the relation between line length and response duration was determined by a power, as opposed to linear function. Koh & Meyer developed the log-polynomial adaptive-regression model to account for their results.

The first significant challenge to the rule-based accounts of function learning was put forth by DeLosh et al. (1997) . In their task, participants learned to associate stimulus magnitudes with response magnitudes that were related via either linear, exponential, or quadratic function. Participants approached ceiling performance by the end of training in each function condition, and were able to correctly respond in interpolation testing trials. All three conditions demonstrated some capacity for extrapolation, however participants in the linear condition tended to underestimate the true function, while exponential and quadratic participants reliably overestimated the true function on extrapolation trials. Extrapolation and interpolation performance are depicted in Figure 10.

The authors evaluated both of the rule-based models introduced in earlier research (with some modifications enabling trial-by-trial learning). The polynomial hypothesis testing model (Brehmer, 1974; Carroll, 1963) tended to mimic the true function closely in extrapolation, and thus offered a poor account of the human data. The log-polynomial adaptive regression model (Koh & Meyer, 1991) was able to mimic some of the systematic deviations produced by human subjects, but also predicted overestimation in cases where underestimation occurred.

The authors also introduced two new function-learning models. The Associative Learning Model (ALM) and the extrapolation-association model (EXAM). ALM is a two layer connectionist model adapted from the ALCOVE model in the category learning literature (Kruschke, 1992). ALM belongs to the general class of radial-basis function neural networks, and can be considered a similarity-based model in the sense that the nodes in the input layer of the network are activated as a function of distance. The EXAM model retains the same similarity based activation and associative learning mechanisms as ALM, while being augmented with a linear rule response mechanism. When presented with novel stimuli, EXAM will retrieve the most similar input-output examples encountered during training, and from those examples compute a local slope. ALM was able to provide a good account of participant training and interpolation data in all three function conditions, however it was unable to extrapolate. EXAM, on the other hand, was able to reproduce both the extrapolation underestimation, as well as the quadratic and exponential overestimation patterns exhibited by the human participants. Subsequent research identified some limitations in EXAM’s ability to account for cases where human participants learn and extrapolate sinusoidal function Bott & Heit (2004) or to scenarios where different functions apply to different regions of the input space Kalish et al. (2004), though EXAM has been shown to provide a good account of human learning and extrapolation in tasks with bi-linear, V shaped input spaces Mcdaniel et al. (2009).

## Methods

### Participants

Data was collected from 647 participants (after exclusions). The results shown below consider data from subjects in our initial experiment, which consisted of 196 participants (106 constant, 90 varied). The follow-up experiments entailed minor manipulations: 1) reversing the velocity bands that were trained on vs. novel during testing; 2) providing ordinal rather than numerical feedback during training (e.g. correct, too low, too high). The data from these subsequent experiments are largely consistently with our initial results shown below.

### Task

We developed a novel visuomotor extrapolation task, termed the Hit The Wall task, wherein participants learned to launch a projectile such that it hit a rectangle at the far end of the screen with an appropriate amount of force. Although the projectile had both x and y velocity components, only the x-dimension was relevant for the task. 

### Procedure

The HTW task involved launching projectiles to hit a target displayed on the computer screen. Participants completed a total of 90 trials during the training stage. In the varied training condition, participants encountered three velocity bands (800-1000, 1000-1200, and 1200-1400). In contrast, participants in the constant training condition encountered only one velocity band (800-1000).

During the training stage, participants in both conditions also completed “no feedback” trials, where they received no information about their performance. These trials were randomly interleaved with the regular training trials.

Following the training stage, participants proceeded to the testing stage, which consisted of three phases. In the first phase, participants completed “no-feedback” testing from three novel extrapolation bands (100-300, 350-550, and 600-800), with each band consisting of 15 trials.

In the second phase of testing, participants completed “no-feedback” testing from the three velocity bands used during the training stage (800-1000, 1000-1200, and 1200-1400). In the constant training condition, two of these bands were novel, while in the varied training condition, all three bands were encountered during training.

The third and final phase of testing involved “feedback” testing for each of the three extrapolation bands (100-300, 350-550, and 600-800), with each band consisting of 10 trials. Participants received feedback on their performance during this phase.

Throughout the experiment, participants’ performance was measured by calculating the distance between the produced x-velocity of the projectiles and the closest edge of the current velocity band. Lower distances indicated better performance.

After completing the experiment, participants were debriefed and provided with an opportunity to ask questions about the study.

cluster Test Phase (Counterbalanced Order) data1 Varied Training 800-1000 1000-1200 1200-1400 Test1 Test   Novel Bands 100-300 350-550 600-800 data1->Test1 data2 Constant Training 800-1000 data2->Test1 Test3    Final Test  Novel With Feedback   100-300 350-550 600-800 Test2  Test  Varied Training Bands   800-1000 1000-1200 1200-1400 Test1->Test2 Test2->Test3